README.md, before:

# RadixRouter

![License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/wilaak/radix-router.svg)
![Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/wilaak/radix-router.svg)

This library provides a minimal radix tree based HTTP request router implementation (see [benchmarks](#benchmarks) and [integrations](#integrations))

## Install

Install with composer:

    composer require wilaak/radix-router

Requires PHP 8.0 or newer

## Usage

Below is an example to get you started.

```PHP
$router = new Wilaak\Http\RadixRouter;

$router->add(['GET'], '/', function () {
    echo "Welcome!";
});

$router->add(['GET'], '/hello/:name?', function ($name = 'World') {
    echo "Hello, $name!";
});

// Get the request HTTP method (GET, POST, etc.)
$method = $_SERVER['REQUEST_METHOD'];

// Get the request path, removing any query parameters (?foo=bar)
$path = rawurldecode(
    strtok($_SERVER['REQUEST_URI'], '?')
);

$result = $router->lookup($method, $path);

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // Route found, call the handler with parameters
        $result['handler'](...$result['params']);
        break;

    case 404:
        // No matching route found
        http_response_code(404);
        echo '404 Not Found';
        break;

    case 405:
        // Method not allowed for this route
        header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $result['allowed_methods']));
        http_response_code(405);
        echo '405 Method Not Allowed';
        break;
}
```

### Route Configuration

You can provide any value as the handler. The order of route matching is: static > parameter > wildcard. Below is an example showing the different ways to define routes.

> [!NOTE]   
> Patterns are normalized, so `/about` and `/about/` are treated as the same route. Attempting to register both will result in a conflict. Read more in [path correction](#path-correction).

```php
// Static route
$router->add(['GET'], '/about', 'AboutController@show');

// Multiple HTTP methods
$router->add(['GET', 'POST'], '/form', 'FormController@handle');

// Required parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/users/:id', 'UserController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /users     -> no match
//   /users/123 -> ['id' => '123']

// Optional parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/profile/:username?', 'ProfileController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /profile      -> [] (empty)
//   /profile/jane -> ['username' => 'jane'])

// Chained optional parameters
$router->add(['GET'], '/archive/:year?/:month?', 'ArchiveController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /archive         -> [] (empty)
//   /archive/1974    -> ['year' => '1974']
//   /archive/1974/06 -> ['year' => '1974', 'month' => '06']

// Wildcard (Catch-All) parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/files/:path*', 'FileController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /files                  -> ['path' => ''] (empty string)
//   /files/readme.txt       -> ['path' => 'readme.txt'])
//   /files/images/photo.jpg -> ['path' => 'images/photo.jpg']
```

### Listing Routes

The router provides a convenient method for listing routes and their associated handlers.

```php
// List all routes
printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", 'METHOD', 'PATTERN', 'HANDLER');
printf("%s\n", str_repeat('-', 60));
$routes = $router->list();
foreach ($routes as $route) {
    printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", $route['method'], $route['pattern'], $route['handler']);
}

// List routes for specific path
printf("%s\n", str_repeat('-', 60));
$filtered = $router->list('/form');
foreach ($filtered as $route) {
    printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", $route['method'], $route['pattern'], $route['handler']);
}
```

Example Output:

```
METHOD    PATTERN                   HANDLER
------------------------------------------------------------
GET       /about                    AboutController@show
GET       /archive/:year?/:month?   ArchiveController@show
GET       /files/:path*             FileController@show
GET       /form                     FormController@handle
POST      /form                     FormController@handle
GET       /profile/:username?       ProfileController@show
GET       /users/:id                UserController@show
------------------------------------------------------------
GET       /form                     FormController@handle
POST      /form                     FormController@handle
```

### Route Caching

By storing your routes in a PHP file you let OPcache keep it in memory between requests.

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> You must only provide serializable handlers such as strings or arrays. Closures and anonymous functions are not supported for route caching.

```php
$cache = __DIR__ . '/radixrouter.cache.php';

if (!file_exists($cache)) {
    $router->add('GET', '/', 'handler');
    // ...add more routes

    $routes = [
        'tree' => $router->tree,
        'static' => $router->static,
    ];

    file_put_contents($cache, '<?php return ' . var_export($routes, true) . ';');
}

$routes = require $cache;
$router->tree   = $routes['tree'];
$router->static = $routes['static'];
```

## For Integrators

If you are using this as the foundation for your own router there are a couple things you should consider.

### Path Correction

By default the router strips trailing slashes, so registering a route like `/about` will also match `/about/` or even `/about//////`. While this is common behavior in most routers, you may prefer enforcing a single canonical URL. This prevents duplicate content for search engines, ensures consistency, improves caching efficiency, and simplifies analytics.

> [!WARNING]    
> Using paths from `rawurldecode()` in headers can cause security vulnerabilities as it will allow injecting dangerous characters like `%0A` for newlines. Always use the encoded path when redirecting.

#### Collapse Slashes

This finds multiple consecutive slashes in the path and replaces them with a single slash. For example, accessing `/user//123` will redirect to `/user/123`.

```php
if (str_contains($path, '//')) {
    $path = preg_replace('#/+#', '/', $path);
    header("Location: $path", true, 301);
    exit();
}
```

#### Pattern Convention

This ensures the request path’s trailing slash matches the route pattern. For example, accessing `/files/:folder` when `/files/:folder/` is registered will redirect to the version with a trailing slash.

```php
// ...existing code...

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // ...existing code...

        // Follow trailing slash convention of the route pattern
        if (str_ends_with($path, '/') !== str_ends_with($result['pattern'], '/')) {
            $canonicalPath = rtrim($path, '/');
            if (str_ends_with($result['pattern'], '/')) {
                $canonicalPath = "{$canonicalPath}/";
            }
        }

        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 404:
        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 405:
        // ...existing code...
        break;
}
```

### Handling OPTIONS Requests and CORS

For OPTIONS requests you should always inform the client which HTTP methods are allowed for the path by setting the Allow header. An easy way of enabling this behavior is by upgrading a 405 response and automatically injecting the headers for registered routes.

You should also support [CORS Preflight requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Preflight_request) or to set other custom headers in these automatic responses. This is best handled via configuration or middleware in your integration.

```php
// ...existing code...

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // ...existing code...

        // Add necessary headers if this is an OPTIONS request
        if ($method === 'OPTIONS') {
            $allowedMethods = $router->methods($path);
            header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $allowedMethods));
            // Add CORS headers here if needed, e.g.:
            // if (isset($_SERVER['HTTP_ORIGIN'])) {
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *');
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Headers: ...');
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Methods: ...');
            // }
        }

        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 404:
        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 405:
        // Method not allowed for this route
        header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $result['allowed_methods']));
        if ($method === 'OPTIONS') {
            http_response_code(204);
            // Add CORS headers here if needed
            break;
        }
        http_response_code(405);
        echo '405 Method Not Allowed';
        break;
}
```

### Extending HTTP Methods

You may wish to support more HTTP methods than the default ones, for example if you are going to create a WebDAV server.

> [!NOTE]   
> Methods must be in all uppercase and are only validated when adding routes.

```php
$webdavMethods = ['PROPFIND', 'PROPPATCH', 'MKCOL', 'COPY', 'MOVE', 'LOCK', 'UNLOCK', 'REPORT', 'MKACTIVITY', 'CHECKOUT', 'MERGE'];

array_merge(
    $router->allowedMethods,
    $webdavMethods
);
```

### Handling HEAD Requests 

If you are running outside of a traditional SAPI environment (like a custom server), ensure your GET routes also respond correctly to HEAD requests. Responses to HEAD requests must not include a message body.

This is usually done by converting HEAD to GET and returning just the headers, no body.



## Benchmarks

All benchmarks are single-threaded and run on an Intel Xeon Gold 6138, PHP 8.4.11.

- **Lookups:** Measures in-memory route matching speed.
- **Mem:** Peak memory usage during the in-memory lookup benchmark.
- **Register:** Time required to setup the router and make the first lookup. (what matters for traditional SAPI environments)


#### Simple App (33 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     3,890,120 |      424.9 |           0.006 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     3,649,340 |      499.5 |           0.042 |
|    3 |  🥉 **FastRoute (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     2,815,138 |      446.6 |           0.033 |
|    4 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |     2,739,099 |      439.5 |           0.211 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | OPcache            |     2,519,738 |      339.2 |           0.007 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     2,403,765 |      384.2 |           0.050 |
|    7 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     2,273,260 |     1453.9 |           0.045 |
|    8 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |     2,231,400 |      520.4 |           0.052 |
|    9 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |     2,213,228 |      339.0 |           0.022 |
|   10 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |     2,164,663 |      354.3 |           0.159 |
|   11 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     2,156,953 |     1465.6 |           0.108 |
|   12 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |     2,138,630 |      646.3 |           0.616 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |     1,985,828 |     1554.5 |           0.673 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |     1,877,496 |     1442.6 |           0.210 |
|   15 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |     1,368,758 |      340.9 |           0.045 |
|   16 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |     1,358,160 |      374.8 |           0.777 |
|   17 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |     1,251,776 |     1934.8 |           3.023 |
|   18 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |     1,246,070 |     1648.9 |           1.152 |

#### Avatax API (256 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     2,326,472 |      339.7 |           0.006 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     2,189,298 |      726.6 |           0.358 |
|    3 |  🥉 **Symfony (cached)**   | JIT=tracing        |     1,728,377 |      347.9 |           0.069 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | OPcache            |     1,682,310 |      339.7 |           0.009 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,579,697 |      726.6 |           0.332 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,504,520 |     1820.5 |           0.333 |
|    7 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,449,711 |     1895.1 |           0.817 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |     1,291,156 |      621.0 |           4.687 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |     1,175,087 |      347.9 |           0.069 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       934,590 |      621.0 |           7.071 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       866,989 |     2205.2 |           9.608 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       858,352 |     1967.4 |           1.911 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       676,218 |      339.1 |           0.032 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       651,972 |      593.4 |           2.508 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       605,267 |      339.1 |           0.033 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       575,918 |      473.3 |           3.179 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       569,965 |     1697.7 |           2.441 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       552,892 |     1608.3 |           0.557 |

#### Bitbucket API (177 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     1,786,478 |      339.7 |           0.013 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     1,664,734 |      652.0 |           0.389 |
|    3 |  🥉 **RadixRouter (cached)** | OPcache            |     1,319,106 |      339.7 |           0.014 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,244,529 |      652.0 |           0.523 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,191,630 |     1742.1 |           0.311 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,143,738 |     1796.6 |           0.727 |
|    7 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |       951,635 |      341.3 |           0.087 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |       939,828 |      732.3 |           4.434 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |       723,066 |      341.3 |           0.075 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       708,906 |      549.2 |           5.975 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       678,972 |     2129.6 |           8.741 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       676,660 |     1880.1 |           1.661 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       358,298 |      339.2 |           0.045 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       357,987 |      593.8 |           1.044 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       333,705 |      339.2 |           0.041 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       327,091 |      479.1 |           1.230 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       317,329 |     1699.7 |           1.349 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       310,684 |     1605.8 |           0.571 |

#### Large (500 routes)

This tests a large number of randomly generated routes containing at least 1 dynamic segment, depth ranging from 1 to 6.

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     1,769,118 |      339.3 |           0.012 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     1,520,189 |     1724.6 |           0.698 |
|    3 |  🥉 **RadixRouter (cached)** | OPcache            |     1,298,703 |      339.3 |           0.009 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,199,993 |     1724.6 |           0.973 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,131,474 |     2834.5 |           0.805 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,021,850 |     2945.6 |           2.254 |
|    7 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |       451,571 |      341.0 |           0.078 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |       433,689 |      917.5 |          12.106 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |       382,095 |      341.0 |           0.079 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       373,327 |      917.5 |          15.708 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       355,714 |     2517.6 |          18.597 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       352,571 |     2300.6 |           2.864 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       207,736 |      397.8 |           0.042 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       203,890 |      835.7 |           1.320 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       191,926 |      339.0 |           0.041 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       184,481 |      721.3 |           2.294 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       183,514 |     1961.7 |           1.842 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       179,370 |     1891.1 |           1.193 |

## Integrations

- [Mezzio](https://github.com/sirix777/mezzio-radixrouter) - RadixRouter integration for Mezzio framework

## License

This library is licensed under the **WTFPL-2.0** license. Do whatever you want with it.

Commit message:

Update header security warning in README

README.md, after:

# RadixRouter

![License](https://img.shields.io/packagist/l/wilaak/radix-router.svg)
![Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/wilaak/radix-router.svg)

This library provides a minimal radix tree based HTTP request router implementation (see [benchmarks](#benchmarks) and [integrations](#integrations))

## Install

Install with composer:

    composer require wilaak/radix-router

Requires PHP 8.0 or newer

## Usage

Below is an example to get you started.

```PHP
$router = new Wilaak\Http\RadixRouter;

$router->add(['GET'], '/', function () {
    echo "Welcome!";
});

$router->add(['GET'], '/hello/:name?', function ($name = 'World') {
    echo "Hello, $name!";
});

// Get the request HTTP method (GET, POST, etc.)
$method = $_SERVER['REQUEST_METHOD'];

// Get the request path, removing any query parameters (?foo=bar)
$path = rawurldecode(
    strtok($_SERVER['REQUEST_URI'], '?')
);

$result = $router->lookup($method, $path);

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // Route found, call the handler with parameters
        $result['handler'](...$result['params']);
        break;

    case 404:
        // No matching route found
        http_response_code(404);
        echo '404 Not Found';
        break;

    case 405:
        // Method not allowed for this route
        header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $result['allowed_methods']));
        http_response_code(405);
        echo '405 Method Not Allowed';
        break;
}
```

### Route Configuration

You can provide any value as the handler. The order of route matching is: static > parameter > wildcard. Below is an example showing the different ways to define routes.

> [!NOTE]   
> Patterns are normalized, so `/about` and `/about/` are treated as the same route. Attempting to register both will result in a conflict. Read more in [path correction](#path-correction).

```php
// Static route
$router->add(['GET'], '/about', 'AboutController@show');

// Multiple HTTP methods
$router->add(['GET', 'POST'], '/form', 'FormController@handle');

// Required parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/users/:id', 'UserController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /users     -> no match
//   /users/123 -> ['id' => '123']

// Optional parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/profile/:username?', 'ProfileController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /profile      -> [] (empty)
//   /profile/jane -> ['username' => 'jane'])

// Chained optional parameters
$router->add(['GET'], '/archive/:year?/:month?', 'ArchiveController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /archive         -> [] (empty)
//   /archive/1974    -> ['year' => '1974']
//   /archive/1974/06 -> ['year' => '1974', 'month' => '06']

// Wildcard (Catch-All) parameter
$router->add(['GET'], '/files/:path*', 'FileController@show');
// Example requests:
//   /files                  -> ['path' => ''] (empty string)
//   /files/readme.txt       -> ['path' => 'readme.txt'])
//   /files/images/photo.jpg -> ['path' => 'images/photo.jpg']
```

### Listing Routes

The router provides a convenient method for listing routes and their associated handlers.

```php
// List all routes
printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", 'METHOD', 'PATTERN', 'HANDLER');
printf("%s\n", str_repeat('-', 60));
$routes = $router->list();
foreach ($routes as $route) {
    printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", $route['method'], $route['pattern'], $route['handler']);
}

// List routes for specific path
printf("%s\n", str_repeat('-', 60));
$filtered = $router->list('/form');
foreach ($filtered as $route) {
    printf("%-8s  %-24s  %s\n", $route['method'], $route['pattern'], $route['handler']);
}
```

Example Output:

```
METHOD    PATTERN                   HANDLER
------------------------------------------------------------
GET       /about                    AboutController@show
GET       /archive/:year?/:month?   ArchiveController@show
GET       /files/:path*             FileController@show
GET       /form                     FormController@handle
POST      /form                     FormController@handle
GET       /profile/:username?       ProfileController@show
GET       /users/:id                UserController@show
------------------------------------------------------------
GET       /form                     FormController@handle
POST      /form                     FormController@handle
```

### Route Caching

By storing your routes in a PHP file you let OPcache keep it in memory between requests.

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> You must only provide serializable handlers such as strings or arrays. Closures and anonymous functions are not supported for route caching.

```php
$cache = __DIR__ . '/radixrouter.cache.php';

if (!file_exists($cache)) {
    $router->add('GET', '/', 'handler');
    // ...add more routes

    $routes = [
        'tree' => $router->tree,
        'static' => $router->static,
    ];

    file_put_contents($cache, '<?php return ' . var_export($routes, true) . ';');
}

$routes = require $cache;
$router->tree   = $routes['tree'];
$router->static = $routes['static'];
```

## For Integrators

If you are using this as the foundation for your own router there are a couple things you should consider.

### Path Correction

By default the router strips trailing slashes, so registering a route like `/about` will also match `/about/` or even `/about//////`. While this is common behavior in most routers, you may prefer enforcing a single canonical URL. This prevents duplicate content for search engines, ensures consistency, improves caching efficiency, and simplifies analytics.

> [!CAUTION]    
> Never use paths from `rawurldecode()` directly in HTTP headers. Decoded paths may contain dangerous characters (like `%0A` for newlines) that can lead to header injection vulnerabilities. Always use the original, encoded path when setting headers or performing redirects. Validate and sanitize user input as needed.


#### Collapse Slashes

This finds multiple consecutive slashes in the path and replaces them with a single slash. For example, accessing `/user//123` will redirect to `/user/123`.

```php
if (str_contains($path, '//')) {
    $path = preg_replace('#/+#', '/', $path);
    header("Location: $path", true, 301);
    exit();
}
```

#### Pattern Convention

This ensures the request path’s trailing slash matches the route pattern. For example, accessing `/files/:folder` when `/files/:folder/` is registered will redirect to the version with a trailing slash.

```php
// ...existing code...

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // ...existing code...

        // Follow trailing slash convention of the route pattern
        if (str_ends_with($path, '/') !== str_ends_with($result['pattern'], '/')) {
            $canonicalPath = rtrim($path, '/');
            if (str_ends_with($result['pattern'], '/')) {
                $canonicalPath = "{$canonicalPath}/";
            }
        }

        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 404:
        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 405:
        // ...existing code...
        break;
}
```

### Handling OPTIONS Requests and CORS

For OPTIONS requests you should always inform the client which HTTP methods are allowed for the path by setting the Allow header. An easy way of enabling this behavior is by upgrading a 405 response and automatically injecting the headers for registered routes.

You should also support [CORS Preflight requests](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Preflight_request) or to set other custom headers in these automatic responses. This is best handled via configuration or middleware in your integration.

```php
// ...existing code...

switch ($result['code']) {
    case 200:
        // ...existing code...

        // Add necessary headers if this is an OPTIONS request
        if ($method === 'OPTIONS') {
            $allowedMethods = $router->methods($path);
            header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $allowedMethods));
            // Add CORS headers here if needed, e.g.:
            // if (isset($_SERVER['HTTP_ORIGIN'])) {
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *');
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Headers: ...');
            //     header('Access-Control-Allow-Methods: ...');
            // }
        }

        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 404:
        // ...existing code...
        break;

    case 405:
        // Method not allowed for this route
        header('Allow: ' . implode(',', $result['allowed_methods']));
        if ($method === 'OPTIONS') {
            http_response_code(204);
            // Add CORS headers here if needed
            break;
        }
        http_response_code(405);
        echo '405 Method Not Allowed';
        break;
}
```

### Extending HTTP Methods

You may wish to support more HTTP methods than the default ones, for example if you are going to create a WebDAV server.

> [!NOTE]   
> Methods must be in all uppercase and are only validated when adding routes.

```php
$webdavMethods = ['PROPFIND', 'PROPPATCH', 'MKCOL', 'COPY', 'MOVE', 'LOCK', 'UNLOCK', 'REPORT', 'MKACTIVITY', 'CHECKOUT', 'MERGE'];

array_merge(
    $router->allowedMethods,
    $webdavMethods
);
```

### Handling HEAD Requests 

If you are running outside of a traditional SAPI environment (like a custom server), ensure your GET routes also respond correctly to HEAD requests. Responses to HEAD requests must not include a message body.

This is usually done by converting HEAD to GET and returning just the headers, no body.



## Benchmarks

All benchmarks are single-threaded and run on an Intel Xeon Gold 6138, PHP 8.4.11.

- **Lookups:** Measures in-memory route matching speed.
- **Mem:** Peak memory usage during the in-memory lookup benchmark.
- **Register:** Time required to setup the router and make the first lookup. (what matters for traditional SAPI environments)


#### Simple App (33 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     3,890,120 |      424.9 |           0.006 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     3,649,340 |      499.5 |           0.042 |
|    3 |  🥉 **FastRoute (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     2,815,138 |      446.6 |           0.033 |
|    4 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |     2,739,099 |      439.5 |           0.211 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | OPcache            |     2,519,738 |      339.2 |           0.007 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     2,403,765 |      384.2 |           0.050 |
|    7 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     2,273,260 |     1453.9 |           0.045 |
|    8 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |     2,231,400 |      520.4 |           0.052 |
|    9 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |     2,213,228 |      339.0 |           0.022 |
|   10 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |     2,164,663 |      354.3 |           0.159 |
|   11 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     2,156,953 |     1465.6 |           0.108 |
|   12 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |     2,138,630 |      646.3 |           0.616 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |     1,985,828 |     1554.5 |           0.673 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |     1,877,496 |     1442.6 |           0.210 |
|   15 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |     1,368,758 |      340.9 |           0.045 |
|   16 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |     1,358,160 |      374.8 |           0.777 |
|   17 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |     1,251,776 |     1934.8 |           3.023 |
|   18 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |     1,246,070 |     1648.9 |           1.152 |

#### Avatax API (256 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     2,326,472 |      339.7 |           0.006 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     2,189,298 |      726.6 |           0.358 |
|    3 |  🥉 **Symfony (cached)**   | JIT=tracing        |     1,728,377 |      347.9 |           0.069 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | OPcache            |     1,682,310 |      339.7 |           0.009 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,579,697 |      726.6 |           0.332 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,504,520 |     1820.5 |           0.333 |
|    7 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,449,711 |     1895.1 |           0.817 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |     1,291,156 |      621.0 |           4.687 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |     1,175,087 |      347.9 |           0.069 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       934,590 |      621.0 |           7.071 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       866,989 |     2205.2 |           9.608 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       858,352 |     1967.4 |           1.911 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       676,218 |      339.1 |           0.032 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       651,972 |      593.4 |           2.508 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       605,267 |      339.1 |           0.033 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       575,918 |      473.3 |           3.179 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       569,965 |     1697.7 |           2.441 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       552,892 |     1608.3 |           0.557 |

#### Bitbucket API (177 routes)

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     1,786,478 |      339.7 |           0.013 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     1,664,734 |      652.0 |           0.389 |
|    3 |  🥉 **RadixRouter (cached)** | OPcache            |     1,319,106 |      339.7 |           0.014 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,244,529 |      652.0 |           0.523 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,191,630 |     1742.1 |           0.311 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,143,738 |     1796.6 |           0.727 |
|    7 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |       951,635 |      341.3 |           0.087 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |       939,828 |      732.3 |           4.434 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |       723,066 |      341.3 |           0.075 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       708,906 |      549.2 |           5.975 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       678,972 |     2129.6 |           8.741 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       676,660 |     1880.1 |           1.661 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       358,298 |      339.2 |           0.045 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       357,987 |      593.8 |           1.044 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       333,705 |      339.2 |           0.041 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       327,091 |      479.1 |           1.230 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       317,329 |     1699.7 |           1.349 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       310,684 |     1605.8 |           0.571 |

#### Large (500 routes)

This tests a large number of randomly generated routes containing at least 1 dynamic segment, depth ranging from 1 to 6.

| Rank | Router                       | Mode               | Lookups/sec   | Mem (KB)   | Register (ms)   |
|------|------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|------------|-----------------|
|    1 |  🏆 **RadixRouter (cached)** | JIT=tracing        |     1,769,118 |      339.3 |           0.012 |
|    2 |  🥈 **RadixRouter**        | JIT=tracing        |     1,520,189 |     1724.6 |           0.698 |
|    3 |  🥉 **RadixRouter (cached)** | OPcache            |     1,298,703 |      339.3 |           0.009 |
|    4 |  **RadixRouter**             | OPcache            |     1,199,993 |     1724.6 |           0.973 |
|    5 |  **RadixRouter**             | No OPcache         |     1,131,474 |     2834.5 |           0.805 |
|    6 |  **RadixRouter (cached)**    | No OPcache         |     1,021,850 |     2945.6 |           2.254 |
|    7 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | JIT=tracing        |       451,571 |      341.0 |           0.078 |
|    8 |  **Symfony**                 | JIT=tracing        |       433,689 |      917.5 |          12.106 |
|    9 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | OPcache            |       382,095 |      341.0 |           0.079 |
|   10 |  **Symfony**                 | OPcache            |       373,327 |      917.5 |          15.708 |
|   11 |  **Symfony**                 | No OPcache         |       355,714 |     2517.6 |          18.597 |
|   12 |  **Symfony (cached)**        | No OPcache         |       352,571 |     2300.6 |           2.864 |
|   13 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | JIT=tracing        |       207,736 |      397.8 |           0.042 |
|   14 |  **FastRoute**               | JIT=tracing        |       203,890 |      835.7 |           1.320 |
|   15 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | OPcache            |       191,926 |      339.0 |           0.041 |
|   16 |  **FastRoute**               | OPcache            |       184,481 |      721.3 |           2.294 |
|   17 |  **FastRoute**               | No OPcache         |       183,514 |     1961.7 |           1.842 |
|   18 |  **FastRoute (cached)**      | No OPcache         |       179,370 |     1891.1 |           1.193 |

## Integrations

- [Mezzio](https://github.com/sirix777/mezzio-radixrouter) - RadixRouter integration for Mezzio framework

## License

This library is licensed under the **WTFPL-2.0** license. Do whatever you want with it.
